I’ll never forget the time I fell in love with the beauty of data analytics through oil trucks.

The first quarter of 2021 witnessed the nightmare for Indonesia’s energy due to the oil supply crisis. Because many gas stations had a lack of available stock to sell, public demonstrations happened for nearly five weeks. With the limited oil supply either from refineries or foreign countries, we needed to create an efficient operation scheme in order to deliver it to the gas station. To overcome the situation, Pertamina decided to create a task force to accelerate the operation by measuring every variable related to oil distribution through oil trucks. Using K-Means as the algorithm, we managed to cluster all of the oil trucks based on number of compartments, carrying capacity, speed, etc. Not only that, we also considered some external associated factors like driver’s performance, traffic jam hour, and road width as the additional clustering variables. We found that some vehicles are not efficient enough to be used for particular territories, affecting an inefficient distribution scheme. Later, we managed to normalize the operation within ten days through data optimization. 

In 2017, I read an article from The Economist which said data would be the new oil. Since then, I have been preparing myself to be a data analyst by taking related courses in my undergraduate studies, such as probability and statistics, discrete structure , etc. My first project related to data analysis during college was an underwater data acquisition through a remotely operated vehicle. I continually honed my programming (data related) skills by taking licenses in python courses via Indonesia Ai, while for Structured Query Language and Tableau Data Visualization were from Udemy. I am very interested in exploring how data can solve real-world challenges and find hidden insights that would be valuable. Moreover, my inquisitive mind pushes me further to explore more interesting domains such as predictive analysis, big data, and artificial intelligence. As the result of all my continuous learning, I managed to become The First Winner in Indonesia's National Data Science Competition held by Datacamp in 2021.

As a part of my working experience, I gained familiarity with data analytics. During my period as a consulting sales engineer at Keyence Corporation, I needed to do market analysis, competitor mapping, and industrial forecasts to decide which types of products or systems would be competitive in the market. Later, when I occupied the position in the Supply and Distribution Division in Pertamina, I had to maintain energy supply and demand which involved a bunch of data. Without having a good data management and predicting capability, the availability of energy supply will be threatened. I believe those previous experiences further support me in having strong analytical thinking and well-versed with several data processing tools or programming languages such as Microsoft Excel, TensorFlow, and Tableau.

I always believe that data is a powerful asset, but it is often hidden within mighty walled gardens. When I had a project to analyse and forecast the recovery of the tourism sector in Indonesia after pandemic COVID-19, it took me around one week just to get data from The Indonesia Statistical Center (Badan Pusat Statistik). This is the epitome of the concerning data ecosystem in Indonesia. Not only that, the number of formal education institutions that can provide deeper knowledge about data is quite limited. Therefore, I needed to find other sources like online courses, attending webinars, or reading books in order to get to know more about the advanced information associated with data science. Even though I am confident  in my self-study, I believe that formal education would provide me with a deeper understanding of statistical theory and mathematics, two critical aspects that quite rare to be found in informal courses.

For that reason, I choose MSc in Statistics (Data Science) Imperial College London. This course is appealing because, apart from learning core computational skills, the students also can learn rare things that are applicable in the industry, such as stochastic processes and the Bayesian method. Having previously taken a lot of courses on data analytical languages,  I am sure this program will sharpen my data processing competency with multiple fundamentals of statistical theories and broaden my technical skills in doing predictive analysis . This course has also been accredited by Royal Statistical Society, which will help my future career as a data scientist due to this recognition. In addition to compulsory modules, I plan to enrol in stochastic processes because the petroleum industry has a high degree of uncertainty. By advancing it, I am sure it will help my companies lower the risk of investment and operation. Besides my studies, I intend to join the Imperial Entrepreneurs Student Union since I always dream of having my own consulting firm with a specialization in statistical analysis in the future. The community offers a mentorship program, connecting participants with other students with the same interest, admired entrepreneurs and investors. By exchanging various ideas and working with people of the same spirit, it will be a beneficial experience to shape my future. As a world-class university that always stands among the top ten educational institutions in the world, I am confident that Imperial College London can help me build an excellent foundation in understanding advanced knowledge in the areas of statistics and solve problems across a wide range of industries through applied and computational skills.

After finishing the master's degree, I plan to return to my current company, Pertamina, as a data scientist. With all the comprehensive knowledge that has been gained during the study, I believe it is going to be beneficial since most oil and gas companies are currently doing digital and renewable energy transformation. As it has been known, one of the toughest challenges to implement a renewable energy business is located in the cost. Commonly, it will produce less energy compared to fossil fuel energy sources for the same cost. This is why the presence of data will be crucial to increase the efficiency of operations during the transition . In 10 years, I wish to be the country’s leading expert in data science to support the unfolding Indonesia 4.0 as data has been one of the five priority sectors in the nation’s roadmap.

In conclusion, the unique and comprehensive program that is provided by MSc Statistics (Data Science) Imperial College London will significantly help me to achieve my goals as a data science expert in Indonesia. I believe my past experiences in dealing with a lot of data, with the rare perspective of energy companies, could enrich the points of view and discussion during coursework. If I were granted the opportunity, I would utilize the experience, knowledge, and network I gained to make a better Indonesia through the beauty of data analytics. For those reasons, I hope I can be considered as a strong candidate for the program.
 
